# phys-chem-reports

This project serves as a general LaTeX-template for the lab reports in the physical chemistry practical at the
Universit채t Bremen. It is designed with the practical itself in mind, but certainly can be made to work with any other
practical, so long you know your way around LaTeX.

## Usage

Overarching configuration is done in `main.tex`. The actual contents of each report is stowed away into separate
subfolders, with separate bibliographies. The template is configured such that it uses the short experiment name (e.g.
T2) as the name of the subfolder, finds the tex file in there, and compiles it all together.

Most of the relevant packages should already be included, so you can just start writing.

### Compiling

The engine must be set to LuaLaTeX. If using `latexmk` for compilation, it is already configured to use LuaLaTeX. If
you're using Overleaf, verify that the compiler is set to LuaLaTeX in the project settings, or make Overleaf respect the
`.latexmkrc` file. The supplemental files generated by compilation will be stored in a hidden `.latexmk` directory.

### Writing

For good typography, [`microtype`] is already loaded. In case even that cannot fix your overfull/underfull hboxes, take
a look at which word LaTeX is struggling with and add it to `assets/styles/hyphenation.sty`.

For code highlighting, [`minted`] is already set up. You need a working installation of `latexminted` from PyPI, as well
as add `-shell-escape` to your `latexmk` command. I deliberately decided not to shell escape by default, because that is
considered a terrible idea. I have not tested this on Overleaf, but I assume that it should just work there, without any
additional steps. Otherwise, please consider Overleaf's manual.

Personally, I suggest you write one sentence per line. This makes it easier to track your changes in any sort of version
control. Most importantly, however, you very quickly realise when you're starting with the same word over and over
again, and you're encouraged to have roughly equally long sentences, which makes your text easier to read.

### Customisation

While there is no concrete customisation mechanism in place, you can change basically everything to your liking, given
you can write some LaTeX beyond basic document typesetting. For example, this template uses the font used by the
Universit채t Bremen, Sharp Sans. If you want to change that, take a look at the `assets/styles/fonts.sty` file, where the
font is set up. It is quite a good font, however.

#### Equation, Figure, and Table numbering

The template is configured to number equations, figures, and tables according to the section they are in. If you want to
change that, you can change the `\numberwithin` commands in `assets/styles/display.sty`.

#### GHS

For the preemptive protocols ("Rumpfprotokolle"), you need to include the chemical's GHS. All of that is already loaded,
as well as additional commands to select the appropriate signal word. It is a bit convoluted to write, so here's an
example for benzoic acid (Benzoes채ure):

```latex
\adjustbox{raise=2em}{\mbox{\stackengine{\Sstackgap}{%
\textbf{\Large Benzoes채ure}}{\danger}{U}{l}{F}{T}{S}}}\hfill
\ghspic{acid}\ghspic{health} \\
\ghs*{h}{315}
\ghs*{h}{318}
\ghs*{h}{372}
\ghs*{p}{260}
\ghs*[dots=Haut]{p}{264}
\ghs*{p}{280}
\ghs*{p}{302+352}
\ghs*{p}{305+351+338}
\ghs*{p}{314}
```

This renders a nice block with the chemical's name, the appropriate signal word, the relevant GHS pictograms, and the H
and P statements. Refer to the [`ghsystem`] documentation for more details on how to use it, and which commands are
available.

#### Highlighting Information

I have set up some coloured boxes for important information, warnings, and tips. You can use them like this:

```latexlatex
\begin{bluebox}
This is some supplemental information.
\end{bluebox}
```

Colours available are `greenbox`, `bluebox`, and `redbox`. You should certainly not overuse them, but they might be a
useful tool to make important information in the preemptive protocols stand out. I wouldn't use them in the final
report, however, as they tend to distract from the content.

## Code

For some reports, I wrote some code for plotting and analysis, which is stashed in `bin/`. To use it, you need a working
Python 3 installation, as well as the dependencies for the scripts, ideally inside a virtual environment.
Read the scripts before you execute them blindly, and make sure you understand where they're grabbing the relevant data
from, and where they put the results, if any.

A `pyproject.toml` file is also provided, which should make it easy to set up the python enviroment with the tool of
your choice.

```shellsession
$ python3 -m venv .venv
$ source .venv/bin/activate
(.venv) $ pip install matplotlib numpy
```

## Additonal Information

Normally, LaTeX embeds only the used glyphs of a font into the PDF, to save file size. This can cause problems when
viewing with a stupid PDF viewer like Adobe Acrobat. Therefore, to avoid your professors complaining about blank files,
the template is configured to embed the entire font.

## Copying

The template is licensed under the BSD 3-Clause License. Note that this license does not apply to text, only software.

You are free to use this template for your own reports, and to share it with your fellow students. However, please keep
in mind that verbatim copies of any report in this archive are considered plagiarism. I kept my work present for
reference purposes and to provide preliminary research for literature. For similar reasons, I have removed any data
acquired during my experiments, except when I present it in the report itself in the form of plots.

I absolutely do not give any warranty on correctness of my code used for data analysis, so if you want to use it, please
check it yourself and make sure you understand what it does.

[`ghsystem`]: https://ctan.org/pkg/ghsystem
[`microtype`]: https://ctan.org/pkg/microtype
[`minted`]: https://ctan.org/pkg/minted
